Draft PR (#638)
liveblocks/liveblocks: docs/pages/guides/devtools.mdx

---
meta:
  title: "DevTools"
  parentTitle: "Guides"
  description:
    "Learn how to leverage Liveblocks DevTools to inspect and troubleshoot your
    collaborative application."
---

## What are Liveblocks DevTools?

Our [DevTools](/devtools) are a browser-based extension that integrates with
Liveblocks and your local development environment. This allows you to easily
troubleshoot, debug, and optimize your collaborative online experiences.

<Banner title="Live demo video">

If you want to see how this works in video, be sure to check out this
[live demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-6Jxejp0iuw) on YouTube.

</Banner>

## How DevTools work

Our DevTools communicate with Liveblocks servers in development mode and
retrieve the current state of storage and presence (and history is coming
soon!). The DevTools support one-way data syncs from the Liveblocks client and

> are compiled away in production, similar to other DevTools like React and Redux.

Author: ok thank you . will make a proposition here.

> are compiled away in production, similar to other DevTools like React and Redux.

Author: since I more or less removed this section, I will mark it as resolved.  I won't mention anything about history, but I do think we may get questions because it is obviously there, yet we can’t access it.

<Banner title="Devtools Compatibility with legacy packages">

Our DevTools are currently only available if you are on Liveblocks 0.19 or
later. To view step-by-step instructions on how to upgrade your project to

> Liveblocks 0.19, check out our [upgrade guides](/guides/upgrading/).

Author: Changd to 1.0

> </Banner>

Author: I removed this section and added the blurb from the banner to the opening paragraph.

## How to use DevTools

### Downloading

Our DevTools extension is available for all major web browsers:

- [Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/liveblocks-devtools/iiagocfmmhknpdalddkbiejnfmbmlffk)
- [Firefox](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/liveblocks-devtools/)
- [Edge](https://microsoftedge.microsoft.com/addons/detail/liveblocks-devtools/hfecmmnilleegmjaegkjjklnjbgadikg)

### Features and tips

- You can quickly expand and collapse nested objects within storage by holding
  the `⌥` key (option on Mac) and clicking on the object.
- You can expand and collapse objects with one level of depth by using the arrow
  keys or spacebar.
- When a value in storage changes, the DevTools will highlight the value to
  indicate that it has changed.

> - Storage values are searchable by key.

Author: Nice! will add this for sure.

- Hovering over a value in storage makes a tooltip appear. If clicked, it

>   displays the value of that key.

Author: When I hovered over values with my mac, it would show a little icon that looked like an eye.  If I clicked that eye, then I could see the full expanded version. Does that make sense?

### If DevTools shows an empty page

If you open Devtools after a Liveblocks client has already been initialized, you
may see an empty page. This is because the DevTools are only able to retrieve
the current state of storage and presence. To fix this, you can refresh the page

> or open DevTools before initializing the Liveblocks client.

Author: As an engineer, I would typically already be working on a page locally before opening devtools.   I wouldn't expect to need to have the panel open first, and then reload my page for them to appear.  For that reason, I think this section should exist, but I think it could go in its own troubleshooting section instead.

> ## Using DevTools with the Liveblocks starter kit

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using DevTools with our Starter Kit
```

> The Next.js starter kit is a great way to get started with Liveblocks and learn

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [Liveblocks Starter Kit](https://liveblocks.io/docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit) is a great way to get started with Liveblocks and learn
```

how to use DevTools.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/devtools/liveblocks-devtools-starter-kit.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>

> To use the starter kit with DevTools, run the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use the Starter Kit with DevTools, run the following command:
```

```bash
npx create-liveblocks-app@latest --next
```

You can then follow the guided prompts in the terminal to create your project.

> For additional information on how to use the starter kit, see the
> [starter kit guide](docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit).
> 
> Once you have completed the starter kit prompts and installed the extension,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on how to use the Starter Kit, see the
[Starter Kit guide](docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit).

Once you have completed the Starter Kit prompts and installed the extension,
```

open Chrome (or your preferred browser) and the DevTools panel. You should see
the Liveblocks DevTools extension in the list of extensions. Click on the
extension to open it up.

> Now you can run the starter kit by running `npm run dev` and navigating to
> `localhost:3000`. You should see the values from the starter kit populating.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you can run the Starter Kit by running `npm run dev` and navigating to
`localhost:3000`. You should see the values from the Starter Kit populating.
```

## Testing DevTools with a Liveblocks example

All of our examples hosted on Liveblocks.io are available for you to run locally
from the [Liveblocks repository](https://github.com/liveblocks/liveblocks) under

> the examples directory. For testing and reviewing how to use DevTools, we will

Author: 👍

use the
[Advanced Collaborative Spreadsheet](https://liveblocks.io/examples/collaborative-spreadsheet-advanced/nextjs).

To clone the git repository and run the example, run the following commands:

```bash
git clone <https://github.com/liveblocks/liveblocks.git>  &&
cd examples/nextjs-nextjs-spreadsheet-advanced/
```

```bash
npm install
```

Then, create the `.env.local` file with your `LIVEBLOCKS_SECRET_KEY`:

```bash file=".env.local"
LIVEBLOCKS_SECRET_KEY="sk_prod_xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx"
```

> Open Chrome or your preferred browser and open up the DevTools panel. You should
> see the Liveblocks DevTools extension in the list of extensions. Click on the
> extension to open it up. Now you can run our example by running npm run dev and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Open your browser and open up the developer tools window. Find the newly available "liveblocks" panel there.

<include screenshot>

Now you can run our example by running npm run dev and
```

---
meta:
  title: "DevTools"
  parentTitle: "Guides"
  description:
    "Learn how to leverage Liveblocks DevTools to inspect and troubleshoot your
    collaborative application."
---

> Our [DevTools](/devtools) are a browser-based extension that integrates with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our [DevTools](/devtools) is a browser-based extension that integrates with
```

I check and I found some examples where product consider DevTools to be singular and not pluyral. Like [Google](https://support.google.com/adsense/answer/10858959?hl=en) and [React](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/react-developer-tools/fmkadmapgofadopljbjfkapdkoienihi?hl=en)

> Chrome DevTools **is** a set of web developer tools built directly into the Google Chrome browser.
> React Developer Tools **is** a Chrome DevTools extension for the open-source React JavaScript library

Liveblocks and your local development environment. This allows you to easily
inspect, visualize, and troubleshoot your collaborative online experiences.

DevTools are currently only available if you are on Liveblocks 1.0 or later. To
view step-by-step instructions on how to upgrade your project to Liveblocks 1.0,
check out our [upgrade guides](/guides/upgrading/).

<Banner title="Live demo video">

> If you want to see how this works in video, be sure to check out this
> [live demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-6Jxejp0iuw) on YouTube.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to see how this works in action, check out this [live demo](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-6Jxejp0iuw) recorded by [Vincent](https://twitter.com/nvie) on YouTube.
```

People love when it comes from people. What do you think @nvie

</Banner>

## How to use DevTools

### Install the browser extension

Our DevTools extension is available for all major web browsers:

- [Chrome](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/liveblocks-devtools/iiagocfmmhknpdalddkbiejnfmbmlffk)
- [Firefox](https://addons.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/addon/liveblocks-devtools/)
- [Edge](https://microsoftedge.microsoft.com/addons/detail/liveblocks-devtools/hfecmmnilleegmjaegkjjklnjbgadikg)

### Features and tips

Within the "Liveblocks" panel, you will see two panes: storage and presence. The
storage pane represents each object that you have defined in storage as a tree,
likewise, the presence pane represents each user that is connected to your

> Liveblocks project.

Reviewer: I feel this part should be mopved to the "[Install the browser extension](/docs/guides/devtools#Install-the-browser-extension)" section.

This install section feels kind of empty.

And why don't we split it like that?
1. **Install the Liveblocks DevTools**, with what we have in "Install the browser extension" + the firdst paragraph "Feature and tips"
2. **Try the DevTools now**
   - With our Starter Kit
   - With an example from our gallery
3. **How to use DevTools**, with the "Features and tips" sections
4. **Tips ands tricks**

The flow should be: how we install it, how can I test it, how to best use it.

I know you and @nvie already discussed the structure so let me know if that doesn't make sense

#### Highlighting

When a value in storage changes, the DevTools will highlight the value to
indicate that it has changed.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source

>       src="/images/docs/devtools/highlight-changes.mp4"

Reviewer: The video kind of blinks at the end, which looks a bit annoying

https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/10360044/222199976-fa38d01b-01ae-4ef6-817b-8e9b5290c865.mp4

Reviewer: They all do

      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>

#### Search

Storage values are searchable by key and regex.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source src="/images/docs/devtools/search-regex.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  </video>
</Figure>

#### Hover

Hovering over a value in storage or presence makes an eye icon appear. If
clicked, it displays the value of that key.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source src="/images/docs/devtools/expand-tooltip.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  </video>
</Figure>

#### Expand and collapse

- You can expand and collapse objects with one level of depth by using the arrow
  keys or spacebar.
- You can quickly expand and collapse nested objects within storage by holding
  the `⌥` key (option on Mac) and clicking on the object.

<Banner title="Initialization">

If you open DevTools after a Liveblocks client has already been initialized, you

> may see an empty page. This is because the DevTools are only able to retrieve

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may see an empty page. This is because the DevTools is only able to retrieve
```

the current state of storage and presence. To fix this, you can refresh the page
or open DevTools before initializing the Liveblocks client.

</Banner>

## Using DevTools with the Liveblocks Starter Kit

The Liveblocks Starter Kit is a great way to get started with Liveblocks and
learn how to use DevTools.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/devtools/liveblocks-devtools-starter-kit.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>
To use the Starter Kit with DevTools, run the following command:

```bash
npx create-liveblocks-app@latest --next
```

You can then follow the guided prompts in the terminal to create your project.
For additional information on how to use the Starter Kit, see the
[Starter Kit guide](docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit).

Once you have completed the Starter Kit prompts and installed the extension, run

> the Starkit kit with `npm run dev` and open your browser and to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Starter Kit with `npm run dev` and open your browser and to
```

The [Liveblocks Starter Kit](/starter-kit) is a great way to get started with
Liveblocks and learn how to use our DevTools.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/devtools/liveblocks-devtools-starter-kit.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>
To use the Starter Kit with DevTools, run the following command:

```bash
npx create-liveblocks-app@latest --next
```

You can then follow the guided prompts in the terminal to create your project.
For additional information on how to use the Starter Kit, see the
[Starter Kit guide](docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit).

Once you have completed the Starter Kit prompts and installed the extension, run
the Starter Kit with `npm run dev` and open your browser to `localhost:3000`. You should authenticate, and then create a new draft document.
Once you have created a new document, open up the developer tools window. Find
the newly available “Liveblocks” panel there.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/devtools/liveblocks-starter-dev.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>

### With an example from our gallery

> All of our examples hosted on Liveblocks.io are available for you to run locally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All of [our examples](/examples) hosted on Liveblocks.io are available for you to run locally
```

examples populating storage.

## Features and tips

### Highlighting

When a value in storage changes, the DevTools will highlight the value to
indicate that it has changed.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/devtools/highlight-changes.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>

### Search

Storage values are searchable by key and regex.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source src="/images/docs/devtools/search-regex.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  </video>
</Figure>

### Hover

Hovering over a value in storage or presence makes an eye icon appear. If
clicked, it displays the value of that key.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source src="/images/docs/devtools/expand-tooltip.mp4" type="video/mp4" />
  </video>
</Figure>

### Expand and collapse

- You can expand and collapse objects with one level of depth by using the arrow
  keys or spacebar
- You can quickly expand and collapse nested objects within storage by holding
  the `⌥` key (option on Mac) and clicking on the object

<Banner title="Initialization">

> If you open DevTools after a Liveblocks client has already been initialized, you
> may see an empty page. This is because DevTools is only able to retrieve the
> current state of storage and presence. To fix this, you can refresh the page or
> open DevTools before initializing the Liveblocks client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you open the DevTools after a Liveblocks client has already been initialized, you
may see an empty page. This is because our DevTools is only able to retrieve the
current state of storage and presence. To fix this, you can refresh the page or
open the DevTools before initializing the Liveblocks client.
```

- [Edge](https://microsoftedge.microsoft.com/addons/detail/liveblocks-devtools/hfecmmnilleegmjaegkjjklnjbgadikg)

Within the “Liveblocks” panel, you will see two panes: storage and presence. The
storage pane represents each object that you have defined in storage as a tree,
likewise, the presence pane represents each user that is connected to your
Liveblocks project.

## Trying our DevTools

### With our Starter Kit

The [Liveblocks Starter Kit](/starter-kit) is a great way to get started with
Liveblocks and learn how to use our DevTools.

<Figure>
  <video autoPlay loop muted playsInline>
    <source
      src="/images/docs/devtools/liveblocks-devtools-starter-kit.mp4"
      type="video/mp4"
    />
  </video>
</Figure>
To use the Starter Kit with DevTools, run the following command:

```bash
npx create-liveblocks-app@latest --next
```

You can then follow the guided prompts in the terminal to create your project.
For additional information on how to use the Starter Kit, see the
[Starter Kit guide](docs/guides/nextjs-starter-kit).

Once you have completed the Starter Kit prompts and installed the extension, run

> the Starter Kit with `npm run dev` and open your browser and to
> `localhost:3000`. You should authenticate, and then create a new draft document.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the Starter Kit with `npm run dev` and open your browser to `localhost:3000`. You should authenticate, and then create a new draft document.
```

in production.

(Could insert image here from notion doc)

## DevTools installation

[Our DevTools](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/liveblocks-devtools/iiagocfmmhknpdalddkbiejnfmbmlffk?hl=en)
is available from the chrome web store. You can download it from the store, or
search for it on the main landing page. It is compatible with Chrome and
Firefox.

## Testing the DevTools with a Liveblocks example

All of our examples hosted on Liveblocks.io are available for you to run locally
from the [Liveblocks repository](https://github.com/liveblocks/liveblocks) under
the examples directory.

For the purpose of testing and reviewing how to use the DevTools we will use the
[Advanced Collaborative Spreadsheet](https://liveblocks.io/examples/collaborative-spreadsheet-advanced/nextjs).

After cloning the GitHub repository and navigating to the right example folder:

```
git clone https://github.com/liveblocks/liveblocks.git

cd example/nextjs-nextjs-spreadsheet-advanced/
```

We will need to install packages and create an `.env.local` file, just like we
would do if we were working on the main repository. First, run

> `bash npm install` and then create the `.env.local` file with your

Reviewer: @taylorpwhipp are we sure about the bash? isn't it just `npm install`? It's the first time we introduce `bash`, everywhere it's just `npm install`
